Epimodel 2.0 introduction (#409)
statnet/EpiModel: inst/EpiModel2.rmd

# EpiModel Changes

In this section, we will detail the core functions that remain in EpiModel 2.0 yet received an overhaul for efficiency, flexibility and/or user accessibility. All changes listed in this section will be further demonstrated in the "Pre-EpiModel 2.0 Code Migration" section of this document.

## Mode to Group

The most significant change to the EpiModel workflow is in how we handle heterogeneous sub-populations. In the original EpiModel workflow, designation of a second population under interest, was done by initializing a new network and setting it's `bipartite` input parameter equal to the number of vertices in the first mode:

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
num1 <- num2 <- 50

> nw <- network.initialize(num1 + num2)

Author: Fixed.

```

> This creates a mutli-modal (or bipartite) network in which there were 50 vertices in mode one and 50 vertices in mode two and in which intermodal mixing does not occur, i.e., no edges (links formed between vertices: relationships, partnerships, etc.) match on mode assignment. In order to make modeling in EpiModel more flexible, in EpiModel 2.0 we move away from the language of modes and instead refer to heterogeneous sub-populations as groups. This change requires a change in how one sets up initial networks as well:

Author: Updated with examples.

                       recovery.FUN = recovery.net, prevalence.FUN = prevalence.net,
                       departures.FUN = departures.net, arrivals.FUN = arrivals.net)
```

## Depend to resimulate.network

The `control.net` parameter used to resimulate the network at each time has been renamed from depend

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
control <- control.net(type = "SI", nsims = 10, nsteps = 10, depend = TRUE)
```

to resimulate.network

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
control <- control.net(type = "SI", nsims = 10, nsteps = 10, resimulate.network = TRUE)
```

## Mode to Group Parameters

Mode syntax has been updated to group syntax where appropriate. The following:

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
init <- init.net(i.num = 50, i.num.m2 = 50)
param <- param.net(inf.prob = 0.1, inf.prob.m2 = 0.1,
                   rec.rate = 0.02, rec.rate.m2 = 0.02,
                   act.rate = 5)
```

should be updated to

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
init <- init.net(i.num = 50, i.num.g2 = 50)
param <- param.net(inf.prob = 0.1, inf.prob.g2 = 0.1,
                   rec.rate = 0.02, rec.rate.g2 = 0.02,
                   act.rate = 5)
```

> ## Using accessor functions

Author: @smjenness I kept this section essentially the same, but updated the language to let users know that this change should only apply to user defined functions and that base functions have already been updated. Also notes that there is an expanded example in the Worked Examples section.

The new asseccor functions are easy to use utilities for getting, setting and appending
data, replacing `$`  and `[[ ]]` operations.

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
dat <- list()
partners <- rpois(100, 1)
dat$attr$partners <- partners
```

or 

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
dat <- list()
partners <- rpois(100, 1)
dat[["attr"]][["partners"]] <- partners
```

should be updated in script to:

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
dat <- lisit()
partners <- rpois(100, 1)
dat <- set_attr(dat, "partners", partners)
```

Similarly for retrieval and setting of list elements.

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
partners <- dat$attr$partners
```

or 

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
partners <- dat[["attr"]][["partners"]]
```

should be updated to

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
partners <- get_attr(dat, "partners")
```

And

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
newPartners <- rpois(2, 1)
dat$attr$partners[101:102] <- newPartners
```

or 

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
newPartners <- rpois(2, 1)
dat[["attr"]][["partners"]][101:102] <- newPartners
```

should be updated to

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
newPartners <- rpois(2, 1)
dat <- append_attr(dat, "partners", newPartners, 2)
```

> 

Reviewer: Similar comment for these

Author: Not sure what this comment is referencing.

See `help("dat_get_set", "EpiModel")` for the complete list of accessor functions and their use.

# Worked Examples

The following section presents three worked examples of models built in pre-EpiModel 2.0 and the corresponding changes needed in EpiModel 2.0. Changes will be highlighted by comments.

## SI Model with no vital dynamics:

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## pre-EpiModel 2.0 Workflow
num1 <- num2 <- 500
nw <- network.initialize(n = num1 + num2, directed = FALSE, bipartite = num1)
formation <- ~edges
target.stats <- 400
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 2.0 
num1 <- num2 <- 500

#update to new initialization function network_initialize.
nw <- network_initialize(n = num1 + num2)

#Update to new vertex assignment function set_vertex_attribute

> nw <- set_vertex_attribute(nw, "group", rep(c(1,2), c(num1,num2)))

Reviewer 2: use simpler notation 1:2 instead of c(1,2)
also note somewhere here that groups must be numbered 1 an 2, not 0 and 1 or 1 and 3, but only 1 and 2.

#If looking to replicate 'bipartite' network:
formation <- ~edges + nodematch("group")
target.stats <- c(400, 0)
```

> ```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
> coef.diss <- dissolution_coefs(dissolution = ~offset(edges), duration = 20)
> est <- netest(nw, formation, target.stats, coef.diss)

Reviewer: Maybe add a comment to specify that this part is not changing. 

```suggestion
```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
# Same for both workflow
coef.diss <- dissolution_coefs(dissolution = ~offset(edges), duration = 20)
est <- netest(nw, formation, target.stats, coef.diss)

Author: Overall, added more comments/verbose language explaining what changes and what stays the same.

```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## pre-EpiModel 2.0 Workflow
param <- param.net(inf.prob = 0.4, inf.prob.m2 = 0.2)
init <- init.net(i.num = 20, i.num.m2 = 20)
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 2.0 Workflow

> #Update all parameters and initial conditions from ".m2" to ".g2" language.

Reviewer 2: Use consistent spacing

param <- param.net(inf.prob = 0.4, inf.prob.g2 = 0.2)
init <- init.net(i.num = 20, i.num.g2 = 20)
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## pre-EpiModel 2.0 Workflow
control <- control.net(type = "SI", nsteps = 100, depend = TRUE, 

>                        save.network = TRUE)

Reviewer 2: explain this in more detail

```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 2.0 Workflow
#control.net parameter depend updated to resimulate.network; save.network folded
#into tergmLite.
control <- control.net(type = "SI", nsteps = 100, resimulate.network = TRUE,
                       tergmLite = FALSE)
```

> ```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
> sim <- netsim(est, param, init, control)

Reviewer: same thing

```suggestion
```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
# Same for both workflow
sim <- netsim(est, param, init, control)
```

```

> ## SIR, with vital dynamics

Reviewer 2: Explain in more detail rather than just presenting the code.

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## pre-EpiModel 2.0 Workflow
num <- 1000
nw <- network.initialize(num, directed = FALSE)
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 2.0 Workflow
num <- 1000
nw <- network_initialize(num)
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
formation <- ~edges
target.stats <- 400
coef.diss <- dissolution_coefs(dissolution = ~offset(edges), duration = 20, d.rate = 0.005)
est <- netest(nw, formation, target.stats, coef.diss)
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
param <- param.net(inf.prob = 0.4, act.rate = 1, rec.rate = 0.02,
                   b.rate = 0.005, di.rate = 0.005, ds.rate = 0.005,
                   dr.rate = 0.005)
init <- init.net(i.num = 30)
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## pre-EpiModel 2.0 Workflow
control <- control.net(type = "SIR", nsteps = 100, depend = FALSE, 
                       save.network = FALSE)
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 2.0 Workflow
control <- control.net(type = "SIR", nsteps = 100, resimulate.network = FALSE,
                       tergmLite = TRUE)
```

> ```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
> sim <- netsim(est, param, init, control)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
# Same for both workflow
sim <- netsim(est, param, init, control)
```

```

## User Defined Modules: SEIR Epidemic Model

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## pre-EpiModel 2.0
## Modified infection module
infect <- function(dat, at) {
  
  active <- dat$attr$active
  status <- dat$attr$status
  nw <- dat$nw
  
  idsInf <- which(active == 1 & status == "i")
  nActive <- sum(active == 1)
  
  nElig <- length(idsInf)
  nInf <- 0
  
  if (nElig > 0 && nElig < nActive) {
    del <- discord_edgelist(dat, at)
    if (!(is.null(del))) {
      del$transProb <- dat$param$inf.prob
      del$actRate <- dat$param$act.rate
      del$finalProb <- 1 - (1 - del$transProb)^del$actRate
      transmit <- rbinom(nrow(del), 1, del$finalProb)
      del <- del[which(transmit == 1), ]
      idsNewInf <- unique(del$sus)
      nInf <- length(idsNewInf)
      if (nInf > 0) {
        dat$attr$status[idsNewInf] <- "e"
        dat$attr$infTime[idsNewInf] <- at
      }
    }
  }
  
  if (at == 2) {
    dat$epi$se.flow <- c(0, nInf)
  }
  else {
    dat$epi$se.flow[at] <- nInf
  }
  dat$nw <- nw
  return(dat)
}
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 2.0
#Update `$` operations to accessor functions
## Modified infection module

> infect <- function(dat, at) {

Reviewer 2: name the updated functions here and below something unique, e.g., infect2

  
  active <- get_attr(dat, "active")
  status <- get_attr(dat, "status")
  infTime <- get_attr(dat, "infTime")
  inf.prob <- get_param(dat, "inf.prob")
  act.rate <- get_param(dat, "act.rate")
  
  idsInf <- which(active == 1 & status == "i")
  nActive <- sum(active == 1)
  
  nElig <- length(idsInf)
  nInf <- 0
  
  if (nElig > 0 && nElig < nActive) {
    del <- discord_edgelist(dat, at)
    if (!(is.null(del))) {
      del$finalProb <- 1 - (1 - del$transProb)^del$actRate
      transmit <- rbinom(nrow(del), 1, del$finalProb)
      del <- del[which(transmit == 1), ]
      idsNewInf <- unique(del$sus)
      nInf <- length(idsNewInf)
      if (nInf > 0) {
        status[idsNewInf] <- "e"
        infTime[idsNewInf] <- at
        dat <- set_attr(dat, "status", status)
        dat <- set_attr(dat, "infTime", infTime)
      }
    }
  }
  

>   # Output ---------------------------------

Reviewer 2: remove the ---------- for consistency

  }
  
  return(dat)
}
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 2.0
#Update `$` operations to accessor functions
## New disease progression module
progress <- function(dat, at) {
  
  active <- get_attr(dat, "active")
  status <- get_attr(dat, "status")
  
  ei.rate <- get_param(dat, "ei.rate")
  ir.rate <- get_param(dat, "ir.rate")
  
  ## E to I progression
  nInf <- 0
  idsEligInf <- which(active == 1 & status == "e")
  nEligInf <- length(idsEligInf)
  
  if (nEligInf > 0) {
    vecInf <- which(rbinom(nEligInf, 1, ei.rate) == 1)
    if (length(vecInf) > 0) {
      idsInf <- idsEligInf[vecInf]
      nInf <- length(idsInf)
      status[idsInf] <- "i"
    }
  }
  
  ## I to R progression
  nRec <- 0
  idsEligRec <- which(active == 1 & status == "i")
  nEligRec <- length(idsEligRec)
  
  if (nEligRec > 0) {
    vecRec <- which(rbinom(nEligRec, 1, ir.rate) == 1)
    if (length(vecRec) > 0) {
      idsRec <- idsEligRec[vecRec]
      nRec <- length(idsRec)
      status[idsRec] <- "r"
    }
  }
  
  dat <- set_attr(dat, "status", status)
  
  dat <- set_epi(dat, "ei.flow", at, nInf)
  dat <- set_epi(dat, "ir.flow", at, nRec)

>   dat <- set_epi(dat, "e.num", at, sum(active ==1 & status == "e"))
>   dat <- set_epi(dat, "r.num", at, sum(active ==1 & status == "r"))

Reviewer: add space for consistency 

```suggestion
  dat <- set_epi(dat, "e.num", at, sum(active == 1 & status == "e"))
  dat <- set_epi(dat, "r.num", at, sum(active == 1 & status == "r"))
```

  
  return(dat)
}
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## pre-EpiModel 2.0
nw <- network.initialize(n = 500, directed = FALSE)
est <- netest(nw, formation = ~ edges, target.stats = 150,

>               coef.diss = dissolution_coefs(~ offset(edges), 10))

Reviewer 2: no space between tilde and offset. check throughout for consistency

### Attribute Copying

In line with the above change, we have introduced new helper functions `copy_nwattr_to_datattr` and `copy_datattr_to_nwattr` to streamline copying of attributes between the network and master dat objects. In the new EpiModel 2.0 workflow, any attribute present on the network at time of epidemic simulation is copied to the dat object as a tracked attribute. Similarly, in the course of epidemic simulation, the network object is updated with the current attribute lists. This updating is done automatically with a new function - `nwupdate.net` - that handles all interaction with the network object (explained in more detail in "Network Update" in section "EpiModel Additions & New Features") during the simulation process.

Users should be mindful of the relationship between the network object and formation model used during network estimation. The below table details the scenarios (with example code) in which attributes may or may not be on the network object and formation models: allowed scenarios are in blue, with those in red invalid for estimation.

<center>
![](images/attr_copy.jpg)
</center>

> 

Author: @AdrienLeGuillou:
* Left the title the same as we don't want the user to think this only applies to "group" attribute.
* Can certainly change this if think users will have trouble sussing out the graph.
* Updated. Thanks for catching.
* Updated.

```

Further, the default ordering of EpiModel has been changed with the update to EpiModel 2.0. EpiModel 1.x workflow processed each of the modules in the order as: departures (`departures.FUN`), arrivals (`arrivals.FUN`), recovery (`recovery.FUN`), network re-simulation (`resim_nets.FUN`), infection (`infection.FUN`) and prevalence updates (`prevelance.FUN`). EpiModel 2.0 has been updated to: network re-simulation, infection, recovery, departures, arrivals and prevalence updates (with their associated functions). As usual, default ordering of EpiModel functions can be changed using the `morder` input parameter that is passed through to `control.net`.

Below we present a table classifying each of the built in modules according to two types: protected and disease. Protected functions are those functions that have defaults set within `control.net` and are typically not meant to be interacted with by the user. Those modules of class disease are set by EpiModel based on epidemic type, and input parameters from `param.net` and `init.net` that the users specifies.

<center>
![](images/modules.jpg){ width=50% }
</center>

## Epidemic Type and Module Extensions

> EpiModel has been set up to assist new users in their modeling efforts, while being flexible enough to allow for complex simulation scenarios not handled by base EpiModel modules. If a user passes in an epidemic type through the `control.net` input parameter `type` (e.g., `type = SI`, `SIR` or `SIS`) EpiModel will run the model as specified, using input parameters to automate the selection of appropriate base modules. If however, the user does not pass in a specified epidemic type or the three listed, or passes in `type = NULL` to control settings, then EpiModel will run the model as specified by the user; this includes running any non-standard base modules or additional user created modules in their workflow (examples of which are provided in the "Worked Example" section of this document). Conversely, if a user passes any non-standard base modules or module extensions, the epidemic type is required to be `NULL`. EpiModel will otherwise return an error if these rules are not followed. This change was made to emphasize to more advanced users of EpiModel (e.g., in the development module extensions) that EpiModel will run the model as specified, though the results may not be as expected.

Author: It will run. When "type = NULL" EpiModel will take the supplied inputs and run, or attempt to run, the specified model.

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
# EpiModel 1.x
newAge <- sample(15:65, 100, replace = TRUE)
dat$attr$age <- age
```

or 

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
# EpiModel 1.x
newAge <- sample(15:65, 100, replace = TRUE)
dat[["attr"]][["age"]] <- age
```

should be updated to:

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
# EpiModel 2.0
newAge <- sample(15:65, 100, replace = TRUE)
dat <- set_attr(dat, "age", age)
```

Similarly for retrieval and setting of list elements:

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
# EpiModel 1.x
age <- dat$attr$age
```

or 

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
# EpiModel 1.x
age <- dat[["attr"]][["age"]]
```

should be updated to:

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
# EpiModel 2.0
age <- get_attr(dat, "age")
```

> And

Reviewer: The fact that we are appending two new data point to the "age" attribute sub-element should be explained in text, as well as the fact that there was 100 nodes up to this point. Otherwise, it becomes evident only when we read the `append_attr` function.

# Worked Examples

The following section presents three worked examples of models built in EpiModel 1.x and the corresponding changes needed in EpiModel 2.0. Changes will be highlighted by comments.

## SI Model With No Vital Dynamics

Here we have a simple SI (susceptible to infected) epidemic model on a bipartite network. As we have moved away from bipartite networks to two-group networks, we need to first update our old network formation code. The old bipartite syntax:

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 1.x Workflow
num1 <- num2 <- 500
nw <- network.initialize(n = num1 + num2, directed = FALSE, bipartite = num1)
formation <- ~edges
target.stats <- 400
```

need to be updated to the two-group syntax, noting that to replicate the bipartite structure of the old network, we need to set the `nodematch("group")` terms target statistic to 0 (though this statistic can range from anywhere from 0 to the total number of edges in the network).

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 2.0 
num1 <- num2 <- 500

## update to new initialization function network_initialize.
nw <- network_initialize(n = num1 + num2)

##Update to new vertex assignment function set_vertex_attribute

> nw <- set_vertex_attribute(nw, "group", rep(1:2, c(num1,num2)))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nw <- set_vertex_attribute(nw, "group", rep(1:2, c(num1, num2)))
```

## If looking to replicate 'bipartite' network:
formation <- ~edges + nodematch("group")
target.stats <- c(400, 0)

## If interested in within group mixing; here 100 of the total edges match on group:
target.stats <- c(400, 100)
```

Next we find the coefficient of dissolution and then estimate our network.

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
coef.diss <- dissolution_coefs(dissolution = ~offset(edges), duration = 20)
est <- netest(nw, formation, target.stats, coef.diss)
```

> Similar to moving network formation from bipartite to two-group, we need to update input parameters for initial conditions and epidemic parameters from mode (".m2" suffixes):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to moving network formation from bipartite to two-group, we need to update input parameters for initial conditions and epidemic parameters from mode (`.m2` suffixes):
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 1.x
param <- param.net(inf.prob = 0.4, inf.prob.m2 = 0.2)
init <- init.net(i.num = 20, i.num.m2 = 20)
```

> to group (".g2" suffixes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to group (`.g2` suffixes)
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 1.x Workflow
control <- control.net(type = "SI", nsteps = 100, depend = TRUE, 
                       save.network = TRUE)
```

should be updated to:

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 2.0
# control.net parameter depend updated to resimulate.network; save.network folded
# into tergmLite.
control <- control.net(type = "SI", nsteps = 100, resimulate.network = TRUE,
                       tergmLite = FALSE)
```

Model simulation proceeds as usual.

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
sim <- netsim(est, param, init, control)
```

## SIR Model With Vital Dynamics

Here we have an SIR model (recovery from infection that grants immunity) in an open population, with a one-group network on top. As we are dealing with a one-group network, network formation is fairly straightforward with only a change needed to the function initializing the network. Thus

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 1.x
num <- 1000
nw <- network.initialize(num, directed = FALSE)
```

should be updated to:

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 2.0
num <- 1000
nw <- network_initialize(num)
```

> The function `network_initialize` has several defaults, one of which is `directed = FALSE`, and requires only the total size of the network in most applications. Subsequent estimation of the network proceeds as normal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function `network_initialize` has several default parameter values, one of which is `directed = FALSE`, and requires only the total size of the network in most applications. Subsequent estimation of the network proceeds as normal.
```

### Set Functions

The `set` group of functions sets the value of an item on a sub-list of the `dat` object; these functions are often used at the end of a modules sequence to update attributes or for tracking of epidemic statistics. As an example: 

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 2.0

## Code snippet from one-Group infection module:
dat <- set_epi(dat, "si.flow", at, nInf)
```

> Here, we want to record the number of new infected - `nInf` -  at the current time step `at`. We do so using the `set_epi` accessor function and record the flow of susceptible to infected on to the master `dat` object. All set functions follow this naming scheme, with "set_" followed by the sub-list of interest. Note: that the `set` functions do not modify `dat` in place but return an altered `dat` object that must be assigned back for the changes to be saved,  `dat <- set_attr(dat, "status")` as an example.

Reviewer: last line, there was no new value for `dat <- set_attr(dat, "status")` 

```suggestion
Here, we want to record the number of new infected - `nInf` -  at the current time step `at`. We do so using the `set_epi` accessor function and record the flow of susceptible to infected on to the master `dat` object. All set functions follow this naming scheme, with "set_" followed by the sub-list of interest. Note: that the `set` functions do not modify `dat` in place but return an altered `dat` object that must be assigned back for the changes to be saved,  `dat <- set_attr(dat, "status", new_status)` as an example.
```

> The newest release of EpiModel, dubbed "EpiModel 2.0", brings with it several changes to the EpiModel workflow you may be accustomed to from previous version of EpiModel, as well as adding new functionality to the platform in order to make running dynamic infectious disease models even easier. In this tutorial, we will go through the major changes to EpiModel, detail the new features that have been added and in the final sections provide examples on how to migrate your code from EpiModel 1.x to EpiModel 2.0.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The newest release of EpiModel, dubbed "EpiModel 2.0", brings with it several changes to the EpiModel workflow  as well as new functionality to the platform in order to make running dynamic infectious disease models even easier. In this tutorial, we will go through the major changes to EpiModel, detail the new features that have been added, and provide examples on how to migrate your code from EpiModel 1.x to EpiModel 2.0.
```

Author: @clchand23 I left this line in there as its meant to communicate to the previous users of EpiModel that they may find the changes documented worth noting.

> Throughout this document, `R` code blocks have been commeneted with the relevant EpiModel version to aid users: `# EpiModel 1.x` refers to code used in previous versions of EpiModel and `# EpiModel 2.0` refers to code from the current version of EpiModel. Uncommented code remains unchanged between versions of EpiModel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Throughout this document, `R` code blocks have been commented with the relevant EpiModel version to aid users: `# EpiModel 1.x` refers to code used in previous versions of EpiModel and `# EpiModel 2.0` refers to code from the current version of EpiModel. Uncommented code remains unchanged between versions of EpiModel.
```

> As always information on EpiModel may be found using `help(package = "EpiModel")` or visiting [EpiModel on Github](https://github.com/statnet/EpiModel).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As always, information on EpiModel may be found using `help(package = "EpiModel")` or by visiting [EpiModel on Github](https://github.com/statnet/EpiModel).
```

# EpiModel Changes

> In this section, we will detail the core functions that remain in EpiModel 2.0 yet received an overhaul for efficiency, flexibility and/or user accessibility. All changes listed in this section will be further demonstrated in the "EpiModel 1.x Code Migration" section of this document.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this section, we will detail the core functions that remain in EpiModel 2.0 and that have received an overhaul for efficiency, flexibility, and/or user accessibility. All changes listed in this section will be further demonstrated in the "EpiModel 1.x Code Migration" section of this document.
```

## Rethinking Networks

> The most significant change in EpiModel 2.0 is in how we approach defining, estimating and using networks in epidemic simulations as well as the resultant changes in the EpiModel workflow. The most significant change to the EpiModel workflow is in how we handle heterogeneous sub-populations. In the original EpiModel workflow, designation of a second population was done by initializing a new network and setting it's `bipartite` input parameter equal to the number of vertices in the first mode:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The most significant change in EpiModel 2.0 is in how we approach defining, estimating, and using networks in epidemic simulations, resulting in changes to the EpiModel workflow. The most significant change to the EpiModel workflow is in how we handle heterogeneous sub-populations. In the original EpiModel workflow, designation of a second population was done by initializing a new network and setting its `bipartite` input parameter equal to the number of vertices in the first mode:
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
# EpiModel 1.x
num1 <- num2 <- 50
nw <- network.initialize(num1 + num2, directed = FALSE, bipartite = num1)
```

> This creates a network in which there are 50 vertices in mode one and 50 vertices in mode two and in which inter-modal mixing does not occur, i.e., no mixing within modes. It should be noted, that this interpretation of a bipartite network is not standard. Examples of bipartite networks include health care providers and type of insurance accepted (with modes health care provider and insurance agency, with a link formed if the provider accepts this form of insurance) or business density in a city (with modes businesses and, say, zip-code and a link formed if a business resides within that area). In order to make modeling in EpiModel consistent with expected social network theory, in EpiModel 2.0 we move away from defining our networks as bipartite and instead refer to heterogeneous sub-populations as groups. This requires a change in how users set up initial networks:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This creates a network in which there are 50 vertices in mode one and 50 vertices in mode two and in which inter-modal mixing does not occur (i.e., no mixing within modes). It should be noted that this interpretation of a bipartite network is not standard. An example of a bipartite network is one where the modes are healthcare providers and insurance agencies and links are formed if the provider accepts the agency's insurance. Another example is business density in a city, where the modes are businesses and ZIP codes and links are formed if a business resides within the ZIP code. 

In order to make modeling in EpiModel consistent with expected social network theory, EpiModel 2.0 moves away from defining our networks as bipartite and instead refers to heterogeneous sub-populations as groups. This requires a change in how users set up initial networks:
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
# EpiModel 2.0
num1 <- num2 <- 50
nw <- network_initialize(n = num1+num2)
nw <- set_vertex_attribute(nw, "group", rep(1:2, c(num1, num2)))
```

> Above we have the updated syntax for creating bipartite, now called "two-group", networks within the EpiModel workflow. The network is initialized as usual using `network_initialize` (a new version of `network.initialize` detailed in section "Network Initialization Functions"), however, in order to capture the previous bipartite structure, we set heterogeneity as a vertex attribute instead of a network feature using `set_vertex_initialize` (a new version of `set.vertex.attribute`); in the case of the new EpiModel workflow, this is done using the attribute `group`. This change allows for consistency in interpretation as well as flexibility of network structure: in the bipartite networks we have developed using EpiModel 1.x, mixing between the two modes is not allowed. However, in a two-group network, as group assignment is now a vertex attribute, we can model within group mixing. For example, in a population of males and females, this new workflow allows us to model more than just heterosexual relationships as below:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Above we have the updated syntax for creating bipartite, now called "two-group", networks within the EpiModel workflow. The network is initialized using `network_initialize` (a new version of `network.initialize` detailed in the section "Network Initialization Functions"). However, in order to capture the previous bipartite structure, we set heterogeneity as a vertex attribute instead of a network feature using `set_vertex_initialize` (a new version of `set.vertex.attribute`); in the case of the new EpiModel workflow, this is done using the attribute `group`. 

This change allows for consistency in interpretation as well as flexibility of network structure: in the bipartite networks developed using EpiModel 1.x, mixing between the two modes is not allowed. However, now that group assignment is a vertex attribute in a two-group network, we can model within-group mixing. For example, in a population of males and females, this new workflow allows us to model more than just heterosexual relationships:
```

> It is important to note, that the vertex attribute "group" now takes on a special meaning within the context of EpiModel modeling, separate from other attribute names. Users should be mindful when constructing networks in which "group" is a vertex attribute and note whether or not the interpretation of group aligns with that detailed above.

Reviewer 3: also have suggestions for line 58 that I am unable to make a suggested change for here:

"In this network we have a total of 30 edges (or sexual relationships) in the population, two of which involve individuals of the same sex. We can replicate the traditional bipartite behavior of no within-group mixing by setting the target statistic for total number of within-group edges to 0:"

I also added `` to "group" in the suggested changes below to be consistent with how you had it above, but feel free to change all mentions of "group" (including above) to double quotes "" if more appropriate

```suggestion
It is important to note that the vertex attribute `group` now takes on a special meaning within the context of EpiModel, separate from other attribute names. Users should be mindful when constructing networks in which `group` is a vertex attribute and note whether or not the interpretation of `group` aligns with that detailed above.
```

> Further, the group vertex attribute is restricted to levels of 1 and 2; other combinations of attribute levels - say, 0 and 1 or "male" and "female" - are not permitted here and may result in EpiModel producing unintended results. Finally, we are not limited to replicating bipartite networks and the target statistic for `nodematch("group")` can be any number from 0 to the total number of edges in the network.

Reviewer 3: Before mentioned that the target statistic can be any number from 0 to total edges in the network, is the part about not being limited to replicated bipartite networks necessary? Seems like that is the whole point of all that you've written above.

```suggestion
Further, the group vertex attribute is restricted to levels of 1 and 2. Other combinations of attribute levels (e.g., 0 and 1 or "male" and "female") are not permitted here and may result in EpiModel producing unintended results. Finally, we are not limited to replicating bipartite networks and the target statistic for `nodematch("group")` can be any number from 0 to the total number of edges in the network.
```

> The above restrictions on the group vertex attribute must be taken into account or EpiModel may behave in unpredictable or unexpected ways.

Reviewer 3: again adding `` around group for consistency - see earlier comment on whether it should be "group"

```suggestion
The above restrictions on the `group` vertex attribute must be taken into account or EpiModel may behave in unexpected ways.
```

### Attribute Copying

> In line with the above change, we have introduced new helper functions `copy_nwattr_to_datattr` and `copy_datattr_to_nwattr` to streamline copying of attributes between the network and master dat objects. In the new EpiModel 2.0 workflow, any attribute present on the network at time of epidemic simulation is copied to the dat object as a tracked attribute. Similarly, in the course of epidemic simulation, the network object is updated with the current attribute lists. This updating is done automatically with a new function - `nwupdate.net` - that handles all interaction with the network object (explained in more detail in "Network Update" in section "EpiModel Additions & New Features") during the simulation process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In line with the above change, we have introduced new helper functions `copy_nwattr_to_datattr` and `copy_datattr_to_nwattr` to streamline copying of attributes between the network and master dat objects. In the new EpiModel 2.0 workflow, any attribute present on the network at the time of epidemic simulation is copied to the dat object as a tracked attribute. Similarly, in the course of epidemic simulation, the network object is updated with the current attribute lists. This updating is done automatically with the new function `nwupdate.net` that handles all interaction with the network object during the simulation process. This process is explained in more detail in "Network Update" found in the section "EpiModel Additions & New Features".
```

> Input parameters for each of these two functions, for the second group, have also changed with EpiModel moving from mode to group language. Second group parameters or initial conditions are now denoted by a `.g2` suffix as opposed to the `.m2` suffix that was used previously:

Reviewer 3: Suggested changes/comments for line 80 below - question again about `group` vs. "group".

The paragraph below explaining the table is a little confusing. I am not sure what the difference is between the last two scenarios. Do you mean if the attribute is present in the formation model but not on the network for the last scenario? 

> As shown above, if an attribute (in this case `group`) is on the network and both present and absent in the formation model, a valid network can be estimated. If an attribute is missing from both the network and the formation model, a valid network will still result. If, however, an attribute is not present on the network and not in the formation model, this will not lead to a valid network as we cannot estimate edge formation with attributes not present in the networks attribute list.

Suggested changes for line 84 below:

> ## Base Function Changes
> Along with the change to how we build two-group networks, we have also changed the built-in EpiModel functions to make the workflow clearer (particularly for module development on the part of the user). In EpiModel 1.x, no distinction in module functionality was made for bipartite and non-bipartite networks. With EpiModel 2.0, we have split each of the appropriate core modules into one- and two-group sub-functions. Assignment of the correction function is done automatically by EpiModel based on the input parameters passed through `init.net` or `param.net`, if `control.net` input parameter `type` is specified (see next section). 
 
```suggestion
Input parameters for these two functions for the second group have also changed with EpiModel, moving from mode to group language. Second group parameters or initial conditions are now denoted by a `.g2` suffix as opposed to the `.m2` suffix that was used previously:
```

> The use of `tergmLite` is fairly straightforward and uses one of two versions of the full network object during network simulations. If `tergmLite = TRUE` is passed in as a control setting, EpiModel will use the `networkLite` version of the full network, a two-column edgelist representation of the full network. Alternatively, if `tergmLite = FALSE` is passed through, EpiModel will use the original `network` object for resimulations. As an example:

Reviewer 3: suggested changes to line 104: copy-edits

>  EpiModel aims to assist new users in their modeling efforts while being flexible enough to allow for complex simulation scenarios not handled by base EpiModel modules. If a user passes in an epidemic type through the `control.net` input parameter `type` (e.g., `type = SI`, `SIR`, or `SIS`) EpiModel will run the model as specified, using input parameters to automate the selection of appropriate base modules. If, however, the user does not pass in a specified epidemic type, or passes in `type = NULL` to control settings, then EpiModel will run the model as specified by the user; this includes running any non-standard base modules or additional user-created modules in their workflow (examples of which are provided in the "Worked Example" section of this document). Conversely, if a user passes any non-standard base modules or module extensions, the epidemic type is required to be `NULL`. EpiModel will return an error if these rules are not followed. This change was made to emphasize to more advanced users of EpiModel (e.g., in the development module extensions) that EpiModel will run the model as specified, though the results may not be as expected.

suggested changes to line 106: "built in" -> "built-in"

Is "Two-Group Functions" referring to a specific section? It seems like that section has been renamed. Maybe change to be more clear of what specific section you're referring to.

> Note: for two-group models, if `type` is `NULL`, the user must be mindful to select the correct version of built-in modules as described in Two-Group Functions above.

suggested changes to line 110: copy-edits

> Another important change made to the EpiModel workflow was implemented in EpiModel 1.70 but bears repeating: moving away from the language of "births" and "deaths" in models with vital dynamics to "arrivals" and "departures". This change accounts for a wider range of models in which entry into and exiting from the population is not necessarily through a mortality process (e.g., entry and exit through an aging process). To this end, all input parameters based on births and deaths have been renamed based on arrivals and departures. For example the birth rate `b.rate` passed to `param.net`, has been renamed `a.rate` for "arrival rate." The rate for deaths remains named `d.rate` though its interpretation has changed to that of departures. Module functions based on birth and death rates have been changed: `births.FUN` and its associated base module `births.net` are now `arrivals.FUN` and `arrivals.net` (`arrivals.2g.net` in the two group case) respectively. Similar changes exist for `deaths.FUN` and `deaths.net`, which are now `departures.FUN` and `departures.net` respectively.

suggested changes to line 114: copy-edits

> Along with the changes to EpiModel detailed in the previous section, several additions have been made to EpiModel and the EpiModel workflow to improve usability and to clarify the overall epidemic process simulated by EpiModel.

suggested changes to line 118: copy-edits

> The package `tergmLite` has been added as a dependent package for EpiModel. `tergmLite` reduces the overall computational burden that comes with using the full network object in EpiModel simulations. For users whose research needs require only summary epidemiological statistics, `tergmLite` gives significant computational efficiency, with simulation times sped up between 25- to 50-fold depending on the model in question. Details of `tergmLite`, as well as examples of what types of research projects it may be useful for, can be found on Github at [tergmLite](https://github.com/statnet/tergmLite).

suggested changes to line 120:

```suggestion
`tergmLite` uses one of two versions of the full network object during network simulations. If `tergmLite = TRUE` is passed in as a control setting, EpiModel will use the `networkLite` version of the full network, a two-column edgelist representation of the full network. Alternatively, if `tergmLite = FALSE` is passed through, EpiModel will use the original `network` object for resimulations. As an example:
```

> The `set` group of functions sets the value of an item on a sub-list of the `dat` object; these functions are often used at the end of a modules sequence to update attributes or for tracking of epidemic statistics. As an example: 

Reviewer 3: capitalize all headings:

> ### Saving Network and Transmission Matrix

suggestions for line 146: copy-edits

> In parallel with the introduction of `tergmLite` as a dependent package for EpiModel, we updated the output that is saved during simulations. When `tergmLite = FALSE` is passed in as a `control.net` setting, at simulation conclusion the network and transmission matrix are saved to the statistics sub-list of the resultant `netsim` object. Alternatively, if `termLite = TRUE` is input, these objects are not saved. The default is `tergmLite = FALSE`, so the network and transmission matrix are saved as default.

suggestions for lines 150-152: copy-edits

> Prior to EpiModel 2.0, the base functions of EpiModel were built using functions from both `EpiModel` and `network` packages. This intermingling of functions made it difficult for the end user to tease out where network functionality ended and EpiModel began, hampering understanding of the EpiModel workflow and the ability to build module extensions. To more explicitly distinguish the two packages and to make the EpiModel workflow clearer, we introduced a new base function, `nwupdate.net`. This function pulls all interactions with the network object from base functions into `nwupdate.net` and is run at the end of the simulation. By segmenting the EpiModel workflow in this way, base EpiModel modules are now easier to navigate and make clear the output needed for module extensions.
> 
> Note: `nwupdate.net` is a function, like the base initialization function `initialize.net`, that is not meant to be interacted with or changed in most modeling cases. Similarly, because `nwupdate.net` is now handling operations done on network (when `tergmLite` is set to `FALSE`) and networkLite (when `tergmLite` is set to `TRUE`) objects, the user only needs to concern themselves with the core EpiModel disease modules, whether using base EpiModel or designing extension modules.

suggestions for line 156: copy-edits

> New `tergmLite` versions of `network.initialize`, `get.vertex.attribute`, and `set.vertex.attribute` have been updated for use with EpiModel as `network_initialize`, `get_vertex_attribute`, and `set_vertex_attribute`. The default values of each of these functions have been set to run with EpiModel models.

suggestions for line 160: copy-edits and also suggest consistency throughout for `dat` (used below) vs. dat (used above)

> To standardize the methods for reading and writing to the `dat` object, several accessor functions have been added to EpiModel that make clear the indexing and assignment operations that are being done on the master `dat` object during simulation, which means moving away from the `$` and `[[ ]]` operators. These functions belong to the `get` and `set` family of functions and act on the various lists contained within the master `dat` object, including but not limited to the attribute, epi, control, and param lists. These functions take as input, at minimum, the master `dat` object and the item (as a character string) to "get" or "set" (e.g., "age" or "group" in the attribute list or "inf.prob" in the parameter list). Note that these functions and their usage only apply to module extension, where the users are either modifying existing modules or creating their own; they are not meant to be used outside of this setting.

> The `get` group of functions retrieve the value of an item on a sub-list of the `dat` objects, and are most often used when retrieving input parameters of `init`, `param` and `control` objects or for querying current attribute or epidemic tracker lists. As an example:

Reviewer 3: suggestions for line 172: copy-edits

> Here, we want to record the number of new infected, `nInf`,  at the current time step, `at`. We do so using the `set_epi` accessor function and record the flow of susceptible to infected on to the master `dat` object. All `set` functions follow this naming scheme, with "set_" followed by the sub-list of interest. Note: the `set` functions return an updated `dat` object.

suggestions for line 176: copy-edit - been adding in Oxford commas 

```suggestion
The `get` group of functions retrieve the value of an item on a sub-list of the `dat` objects, and are most often used when retrieving input parameters of `init`, `param`, and `control` objects or for querying current attribute or epidemic tracker lists. As an example:
```

> New `tergmLite` version of network initialization function:

Reviewer 3: suggestions for line 185: copy-edits - note: suggest consistency in using `set` vs. set or `dat` vs. dat (leave it up to you for which you go with)

"assigned back" to what?

> Here we are pulling the arrival rate, `a.rate`, from the parameter list and querying the epidemic tracker list for the population size at the previous step. Note that the `set` functions do not modify `dat` in place but return an altered `dat` object that must be assigned back for the changes to be saved. For example, `dat <- set_attr(dat, "status")`.

> To make clear the role that the network re-simulation parameter plays, the `control.net` parameter used to resimulate the network at each time has been renamed from `depend`:

Reviewer 3: resimulation or re-simulation? You use both - suggest using one for consistency

> The new accessor functions are easy to use utilities for getting, setting and appending data, replacing `$`  and `[[ ]]` operations. Base EpiModel functions have already been updated reflecting this change; the following examples detail how users should update any changes to base EpiModel functions or any user-defined functions. For a robust example of how EpiModel 1.x code needs to be updated when using these functions in module extension, refer to "User Defined Modules: SEIR Epidemic Model" in the "Worked Examples" section. Below are example code chunks from extension API:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The new accessor functions are easy-to-use utilities for getting, setting, and appending data, replacing `$`  and `[[ ]]` operations. Base EpiModel functions have already been updated reflecting this change. The following examples detail how users should update any changes to base EpiModel functions or any user-defined functions. For a robust example of how EpiModel 1.x code needs to be updated when using these functions in module extension, refer to "User-Defined Modules: SEIR Epidemic Model" in the "Worked Examples" section. Below are example code chunks from extension API:
```

## SI Model With No Vital Dynamics

Here we have a simple SI (susceptible to infected) epidemic model on a bipartite network. As we have moved away from bipartite networks to two-group networks, we need to first update our old network formation code. The old bipartite syntax:

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}

> ## EpiModel 1.x Workflow

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# EpiModel 1.x 
```

> ## EpiModel 2.0 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# EpiModel 2.0 
```

num1 <- num2 <- 500

> ## update to new initialization function network_initialize.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Update to new initialization function network_initialize.
```

nw <- network_initialize(n = num1 + num2)

> ##Update to new vertex assignment function set_vertex_attribute

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Update to new vertex assignment function set_vertex_attribute
```

nw <- set_vertex_attribute(nw, "group", rep(1:2, c(num1,num2)))

## If looking to replicate 'bipartite' network:
formation <- ~edges + nodematch("group")
target.stats <- c(400, 0)

> ## If interested in within group mixing; here 100 of the total edges match on group:

Reviewer 3: to clarify, does this mean 100 total edges match within group 1 and group 2 equally? like 50 in group 1 and 50 in group 2? 

```suggestion
## If interested in within-group mixing - here 100 of the total edges match in group:
```

Author: This means there are 100 edges that match on the "group" attribute, whether in group 1 or group 2.

Similar to moving network formation from bipartite to two-group, we need to update input parameters for initial conditions and epidemic parameters from mode (".m2" suffixes):

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}

> ## EpiModel 1.x

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# EpiModel 1.x
```

> should be updated to:

Reviewer 3: suggested changes to lines 466-480: note that if you choose to use "re-simulate" with hyphen you should change here too

> to group (".g2" suffixes)
> ```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
> # EpiModel 2.0 Workflow
> ## Update all parameters and initial conditions from ".m2" to ".g2" language.
> param <- param.net(inf.prob = 0.4, inf.prob.g2 = 0.2)
> init <- init.net(i.num = 20, i.num.g2 = 20)
> ```
> Finally, control parameters `depend` and `save.network` (along with `save.transmat`) have been replaced. The control parameter `resimulate.network` has replaced `depend` when a user wishes to resimulate the network at each timestep of simulation. This change makes it clearer what the parameter is actually doing. The parameters `save.network` and `save.transmat` have been replaced with `tergmLite`: if a user wishes to save the network and transmission matrix, they must use the full estimation routine provided by `tergm` (`tergmLite == FALSE`); otherwise, `tergmLite` is used, and no network of transmission matrix is saved. Thus:
> ```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
> # EpiModel 1.x 
> control <- control.net(type = "SI", nsteps = 100, depend = TRUE, 
>                        save.network = TRUE)
> ```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}

> ## EpiModel 2.0

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# EpiModel 2.0
```

> # control.net parameter depend updated to resimulate.network; save.network folded

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## control.net parameter depend updated to resimulate.network; save.network folded into tergmLite.
```

> # into tergmLite.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

## SIR Model With Vital Dynamics

Here we have an SIR model (recovery from infection that grants immunity) in an open population, with a one-group network on top. As we are dealing with a one-group network, network formation is fairly straightforward with only a change needed to the function initializing the network. Thus

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}

> ## EpiModel 1.x

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# EpiModel 1.x
```

num <- 1000
nw <- network.initialize(num, directed = FALSE)
```

should be updated to:

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}

> ## EpiModel 2.0

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# EpiModel 2.0
```

In EpiModel 1.70, the language of "births" and "deaths" was updated to "arrivals" and "departures." Epidemic input parameter "b.rate"

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}

> ## EpiModel 1.x

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# EpiModel 1.x
```

param <- param.net(inf.prob = 0.4, act.rate = 1, rec.rate = 0.02,
                   b.rate = 0.005, di.rate = 0.005, ds.rate = 0.005,
                   dr.rate = 0.005)
```

should be updated to "a.rate":
```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}

> ## EpiModel 2.0

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# EpiModel 2.0
```

> The input parameters for departures do not need to be updated however users should be aware of the change in interpretation. As with the previous SI example, control settings for `depend` and `save.network` (and `save.transmat`) should be updated to `resimulate.network` and `tergmLite` respectively.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The input parameters for departures do not need to be updated. However, users should be aware of the change in interpretation. As with the previous SI example, control settings for `depend` and `save.network` (and `save.transmat`) should be updated to `resimulate.network` and `tergmLite` respectively.
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
## EpiModel 1.x
control <- control.net(type = "SIR", nsteps = 100, depend = FALSE, 
                       save.network = FALSE)
```

```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}

> ## EpiModel 2.0

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# EpiModel 2.0
```

control <- control.net(type = "SIR", nsteps = 100, resimulate.network = FALSE,
                       tergmLite = TRUE)

> ```

Reviewer 3: suggestions for lines 564-569: copy-edits

for all of the code below, change to conventional `# EpiModel 1.x` and `# EpiModel 2.0` and use ## for the comments after

> ## User-Defined Modules: SEIR Epidemic Model
> Our final example is an extension of the SIR model not represented in base EpiModel: an SEIR epidemic that introduces an exposed state to the epidemic process, necessitating an updated infection module and a new disease progression module. Below, we have the new infection module that is based on EpiModel 1.x syntax.
> ```{r echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
> # EpiModel 1.x

suggestions for line 794: 
In EpiModel 2.0, if any base modules have been changed or any user-defined modules are present the user must specify their epidemic type as `NULL`, even if the module potentially follows an acceptable base epidemic type (SI, SIR, or SIS). Further, the user must specify all base epidemic modules, even if these modules are not used within the epidemic process. This change has been made in order to make clear the difference between base EpiModel use (in which most of the modeling setup is automated) and more advanced EpiModel use (including module extension). The above code written in EpiModel 1.x should then be updated to:
